README.md, before:

# Android RC Plane Controller

A Kotlin Android application for controlling a Raspberry Pi Pico W-based RC plane via Wi-Fi. The app provides intuitive dual-joystick controls and sends UDP packets containing flight control data at 20Hz for responsive control.

## Features

### 🎮 Intuitive Controls
- **Left Joystick**: Roll and Pitch control (-1.0 to 1.0 range)
- **Right Joystick**: Yaw control (-1.0 to 1.0 range)
- **Throttle Slider**: Vertical slider for throttle control (0-100%)
- **ARM/DISARM Buttons**: Safety controls with visual feedback

### 📡 Network Communication
- Connects to Pico W Access Point (default: 192.168.4.1)
- Sends UDP packets to port 4444 at 20Hz refresh rate
- Binary packet format for efficient transmission
- Automatic connection monitoring and status display

### 🛡️ Safety Features
- Auto-disarm when app goes to background
- Throttle automatically resets to 0% when disarming
- Visual connection status indicator
- Real-time flight data display

## Network Protocol

The app streams a compact 16-byte UDP packet 50 times per second. All numeric
fields are little-endian IEEE-754 floats so the Pico W can `memcpy` directly
into a C++ struct:

| Field    | Type  | Size    | Range       | Description                  |
|----------|-------|---------|-------------|------------------------------|
| Roll     | float | 4 bytes | -1.0 to 1.0 | Left joystick X-axis         |
| Pitch    | float | 4 bytes | -1.0 to 1.0 | Left joystick Y-axis         |
| Yaw      | float | 4 bytes | -1.0 to 1.0 | Right joystick X-axis        |
| Throttle | float | 4 bytes | 0.0 to 1.0  | Throttle slider (normalized) |

The throttle slider is normalized in the Android app (`progress / 100`) so the
Pico firmware only has to scale it to the configured ESC travel.

### Control signal orientation

- Moving the **left joystick to the right** reports a positive roll value.
- `main.cpp` mirrors that single roll input into two aileron commands:
  - The **left servo** receives a negative PWM delta, rotating clockwise and
    driving the control surface **down**.
  - The **right servo** receives an equal positive delta, rotating
    counter-clockwise and pushing the surface **up**.
- Negative roll values reverse those directions, while pitch and yaw are
  applied symmetrically about neutral.

## Setup and Installation

### Prerequisites
- Android Studio or compatible IDE
- Android device with API level 24+ (Android 7.0)
- Raspberry Pi Pico W configured as Access Point

### Building the App
1. Clone this repository
2. Open the project in Android Studio
3. Build and install on your Android device

### Connecting to Pico W
1. Configure your Pico W as a Wi-Fi Access Point (SSID: typically "PicoW-AP")
2. Connect your Android device to the Pico W's Wi-Fi network
3. Launch the RC Plane Controller app
4. The app will automatically attempt to connect to 192.168.4.1:4444

## Usage

1. **Connect**: Ensure your device is connected to the Pico W's Wi-Fi network
2. **ARM**: Tap the ARM button to enable control (button turns red)
3. **Control**: Use the joysticks and throttle slider to control the plane
4. **Monitor**: Watch the real-time data display for current control values
5. **DISARM**: Tap DISARM button to disable control (for safety)

## File Structure

```
app/src/main/java/com/rcplane/controller/
├── MainActivity.kt          # Main activity with UI handling
├── JoystickView.kt         # Custom joystick view component
└── UdpService.kt           # UDP communication service

app/src/main/res/
├── layout/
│   └── activity_main.xml   # Main UI layout (landscape)
├── values/
│   ├── colors.xml          # App color scheme
│   ├── strings.xml         # String resources
│   └── themes.xml          # App themes
└── xml/
    ├── backup_rules.xml    # Backup configuration
    └── data_extraction_rules.xml
```

## Pico W Configuration

Your Pico W should be configured to:
1. Create a Wi-Fi Access Point
2. Listen for UDP packets on port 4444
3. Parse the 16-byte packet format described above
4. Control servo motors/ESCs based on received data

Example Pico W code structure:
```python
# Pseudo-code for Pico W
while True:
    data = receive_udp_packet()
    roll, pitch, yaw, throttle, armed = parse_packet(data)
    if armed:
        control_servos(roll, pitch, yaw, throttle)
    else:
        set_safe_position()
```

## Troubleshooting

### Connection Issues
- Verify Pico W is broadcasting its Access Point
- Check that Android device is connected to Pico W's network
- Ensure Pico W is listening on the correct IP and port (192.168.4.1:4444)

### Control Issues
- Make sure to ARM the system before expecting controls to work
- Check that UDP packets are being received by monitoring Pico W logs
- Verify joystick calibration by watching the real-time data display

## License

This project is open source and available under the MIT License.

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss proposed changes.

Commit message:

Clarify control signal orientation in README
Updated control signal orientation section to clarify how roll values are handled by servos.

README.md, after:

# Android RC Plane Controller

A Kotlin Android application for controlling a Raspberry Pi Pico W-based RC plane via Wi-Fi. The app provides intuitive dual-joystick controls and sends UDP packets containing flight control data at 20Hz for responsive control.

## Features

### 🎮 Intuitive Controls
- **Left Joystick**: Roll and Pitch control (-1.0 to 1.0 range)
- **Right Joystick**: Yaw control (-1.0 to 1.0 range)
- **Throttle Slider**: Vertical slider for throttle control (0-100%)
- **ARM/DISARM Buttons**: Safety controls with visual feedback

### 📡 Network Communication
- Connects to Pico W Access Point (default: 192.168.4.1)
- Sends UDP packets to port 4444 at 20Hz refresh rate
- Binary packet format for efficient transmission
- Automatic connection monitoring and status display

### 🛡️ Safety Features
- Auto-disarm when app goes to background
- Throttle automatically resets to 0% when disarming
- Visual connection status indicator
- Real-time flight data display

## Network Protocol

The app streams a compact 16-byte UDP packet 50 times per second. All numeric
fields are little-endian IEEE-754 floats so the Pico W can `memcpy` directly
into a C++ struct:

| Field    | Type  | Size    | Range       | Description                  |
|----------|-------|---------|-------------|------------------------------|
| Roll     | float | 4 bytes | -1.0 to 1.0 | Left joystick X-axis         |
| Pitch    | float | 4 bytes | -1.0 to 1.0 | Left joystick Y-axis         |
| Yaw      | float | 4 bytes | -1.0 to 1.0 | Right joystick X-axis        |
| Throttle | float | 4 bytes | 0.0 to 1.0  | Throttle slider (normalized) |

The throttle slider is normalized in the Android app (`progress / 100`) so the
Pico firmware only has to scale it to the configured ESC travel.

### Control signal orientation

- Moving the **left joystick to the right** reports a positive roll value.
- `main.cpp` forwards that positive roll value to both aileron channels and
  converts it to PWM based on servo orientation:
  - The **right servo** uses the full upward travel range, reducing the pulse
    width (clockwise rotation) to lift the surface.
  - The **left servo** also shortens the pulse, producing a clockwise rotation
    that pushes the surface down with the configured reduced downward range.
- Negative roll values expand the pulse widths instead, giving the right servo
  its reduced downward throw and lifting the left surface with the full upward
  range. Pitch and yaw remain symmetric about neutral.

## Setup and Installation

### Prerequisites
- Android Studio or compatible IDE
- Android device with API level 24+ (Android 7.0)
- Raspberry Pi Pico W configured as Access Point

### Building the App
1. Clone this repository
2. Open the project in Android Studio
3. Build and install on your Android device

### Connecting to Pico W
1. Configure your Pico W as a Wi-Fi Access Point (SSID: typically "PicoW-AP")
2. Connect your Android device to the Pico W's Wi-Fi network
3. Launch the RC Plane Controller app
4. The app will automatically attempt to connect to 192.168.4.1:4444

## Usage

1. **Connect**: Ensure your device is connected to the Pico W's Wi-Fi network
2. **ARM**: Tap the ARM button to enable control (button turns red)
3. **Control**: Use the joysticks and throttle slider to control the plane
4. **Monitor**: Watch the real-time data display for current control values
5. **DISARM**: Tap DISARM button to disable control (for safety)

## File Structure

```
app/src/main/java/com/rcplane/controller/
├── MainActivity.kt          # Main activity with UI handling
├── JoystickView.kt         # Custom joystick view component
└── UdpService.kt           # UDP communication service

app/src/main/res/
├── layout/
│   └── activity_main.xml   # Main UI layout (landscape)
├── values/
│   ├── colors.xml          # App color scheme
│   ├── strings.xml         # String resources
│   └── themes.xml          # App themes
└── xml/
    ├── backup_rules.xml    # Backup configuration
    └── data_extraction_rules.xml
```

## Pico W Configuration

Your Pico W should be configured to:
1. Create a Wi-Fi Access Point
2. Listen for UDP packets on port 4444
3. Parse the 16-byte packet format described above
4. Control servo motors/ESCs based on received data

Example Pico W code structure:
```python
# Pseudo-code for Pico W
while True:
    data = receive_udp_packet()
    roll, pitch, yaw, throttle, armed = parse_packet(data)
    if armed:
        control_servos(roll, pitch, yaw, throttle)
    else:
        set_safe_position()
```

## Troubleshooting

### Connection Issues
- Verify Pico W is broadcasting its Access Point
- Check that Android device is connected to Pico W's network
- Ensure Pico W is listening on the correct IP and port (192.168.4.1:4444)

### Control Issues
- Make sure to ARM the system before expecting controls to work
- Check that UDP packets are being received by monitoring Pico W logs
- Verify joystick calibration by watching the real-time data display

## License

This project is open source and available under the MIT License.

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss proposed changes.
